[SYCL] [DOC] Prepare design-document for assert feature (#3461)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/Assert.md

      user_func(It);
      do_smth_else();
    });
  });
  Q.wait_and_throw();
  std::cout << “One shouldn’t see this message.“;
  return 0;
}
```

In this use-case every work-item with even X dimension will trigger assertion
failure. Assertion failure should be reported via asynchronous exceptions. If
asynchronous exception handler is set the failure is reported with
`cl::sycl::event_error` exception. Otherwise, SYCL Runtime should trigger abort.
At least one failed assertion should be reported.

When multiple kernels are enqueued and both fail at assertion at least single
assertion should be reported.

## User requirements

From user's point of view there are the following requirements:

| # | Title | Description | Importance |
| - | ----- | ----------- | ---------- |
| 1 | Handle assertion failure | Signal about assertion failure via SYCL asynchronous exception | Must have |
| 2 | Print assert message | Assert function should print message to stderr at host | Must have |
| 3 | Stop under debugger | When debugger is attached, break at assertion point | Highly desired |
| 4 | Reliability | Assert failure should be reported regardless of kernel deadlock | Highly desired |

> ## Contents of `cl::sycl::event_error`

Author: Added extension document with exception error code.

`cl::sycl::event_error::what()` should return the same assertion failure message
as is printed at the time being.

Other than that, interface of `cl::sycl::event_error` should look like:
```
class event_error : public runtime_error {
public:
  event_error() = default;

  event_error(const char *Msg, cl_int Err)
      : event_error(string_class(Msg), Err) {}

  event_error(const string_class &Msg, cl_int Err) : runtime_error(Msg, Err) {}
};
```

Regardless of whether asynchronous exception handler is set or not, there's an
action to be performed by SYCL Runtime. To achieve this, information about
assert failure should be propagated from device-side to SYCL Runtime. This
should be performed via calls to `clGetEventInfo` for OpenCL backend and

> `zeEventQueryStatus` for Level-Zero backend.

Author: Added limitations.

## Terms

 - Device-side Runtime - part of device-code, which is supplied by Device-side
   Compiler.
 - Low-level Runtime - the backend/runtime, behind DPCPP Runtime.
 - Device-side Compiler - compiler which generates device-native bitcode based
   on input SPIR-V image.
 - Accessor metadata - parts of accessor representation at device-side: pointer,
   ranges, offset.

## How it works?

For the time being, `assert(expr)` macro ends up in call to
`__devicelib_assert_fail` function. This function is part of [Device library extension](doc/extensions/C-CXX-StandardLibrary/DeviceLibExtensions.rst#cl_intel_devicelib_cassert).
Device code already contains call to the function. Currently, a device-binary
is always linked against fallback implementation.
Device-side compiler/linker provides their implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`
and prefer this implementation over fallback one.

If Device-side Runtime supports `__devicelib_assert_fail` then Low-Level Runtime
is responsible for:
 - detecting if assert failure took place;
 - flushing assert message to `stderr` on host.
When detected, Low-level Runtime reports assert failure to DPCPP Runtime

> at synchronization points.

Reviewer: According to the example above, the exception `what()` string should contain the assertion message.  How will this work in the case  where the low-level runtime supports `__devicelib_assert_fail` natively?  I don't see any way in the OpenCL or Level Zero extensions for the DPC++ runtime to get the assertion message string.

Author: Oh, that's a mis-copied part from previous version of the document.
I will fix it.

Refer to [OpenCL](doc/extensions/Assert/opencl.md) and [Level-Zero](doc/extensions/Assert/level-zero.md)

> extensions.

Reviewer: I assume these documents only apply to the case when the device-side runtime supports `__devicelib_assert_fail` natively?  The description below applies only to the cases when these OpenCL and Level Zero extensions don't exist?

Author: Correct.

If Device-side Runtime doesn't support `__devicelib_assert_fail` then a buffer
based approach comes in place. The approach doesn't require any support from
Device-side Runtime. Neither it does from Low-level Runtime.

Within this approach, a dedicated assert buffer is allocated and implicit kernel
argument is introduced. The argument is an accessor with `discard_read_write`
or `discard_write` access mode. Accessor metadata is stored to program scope
variable. This allows to refer to the accessor without modifying each and every
user's function. Fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` restores
accessor metadata from program scope variable and writes assert information to
the assert buffer. Atomic operations are used in order to not overwrite existing
information.

Storing and restoring of accessor metadata to/from program scope variable is
performed with help of builtins. Implementations of these builtins are

> substituted by frontend.

Reviewer: This section on the "dedicated buffer" approach seems too vague.  I think the design document should expand this description to give more details like:

* What are the compiler builtins and what do they do?
* More detail about how the kernel uses the hidden accessor.  Note that kernels cannot normally reference global variables, so the part about "program scope variable" seems suspect.
* What happens if multiple assertion failures write to the buffer.  Does the runtime raise one or many exceptions?  Do you print one message or all of them?  There could be many work items in flight, so printing 100's of error messages might not be a good thing.
* How do you avoid deadlock if a work item triggers an assertion and other work items are waiting on it?  A common example would be a work item that is participating in one of the "group" functions.  Normally, these functions block until all work items reach the "group" function.  What happens if one of the work items gets an assertion failure and never reaches that function?

Author: > Note that kernels cannot normally reference global variables, so the part about "program scope variable" seems suspect.

@gmlueck , could you, please, provide more details on this?

Within this approach, the global variable is not a SYCL variable but a LLVM IR/SPIR-V global variable. Specifically - per module global variable.

Author: > How do you avoid deadlock if a work item triggers an assertion and other work items are waiting on it? 

We can't stop kernel execution within this approach (no support for such sort of operation). Hence, if the deadlock is based on malformed data, it is unavoidable. E.g. nothing stops the user from typing in this code:
```
while(1) {
  assert(false && "This ain't work");
}
```

In this example the user won't get the kernel finished and the assert failure won't get reported.

Reviewer: > > Note that kernels cannot normally reference global variables, so the part about "program scope variable" seems suspect.
> 
> @gmlueck , could you, please, provide more details on this?
> 
> Within this approach, the global variable is not a SYCL variable but a LLVM IR/SPIR-V global variable. Specifically - per module global variable.

Oh, I thought you planned to create a SYCL global variable.  I think I understand this part of the design now.  You will pass a parameter to the kernel that has the address of the "assert buffer" and then store this address in a kernel-side global variable.  The `__devicelib_assert_fail` function can then write the message into the buffer by reading the global variable.

I guess the big part of the design I don't understand now is how the device code aborts a kernel when an assertion happens and then signals the host, telling it that the kernel has aborted.

> ```
> while(1) {
>  assert(false && "This ain't work");
> }
> ```
>
> In this example the user won't get the kernel finished and the assert failure won't get reported.

This makes me think that there is no logic at all to abort a kernel after an assertion failure.  Is the following description accurate?

* A failing assert writes the message to the assertion buffer and then the `assert()` returns to its caller.
* The work item must continue to execute to completion after the failing assert.
* The kernel must complete even after a failing assert.
* After the DPC++ runtime sees that the kernel has completed, it checks the contents of the assertion buffer.
* If that buffer is not empty, the DPC++ runtime prints the message and reports an exception.

If that is the plan, I think we need to consider whether this is useful.  Applications do not expect a failed `assert()` call to return, and the code that follows often won't execute if the assertion condition is false.

If we plan native support for OpenCL and Level Zero, maybe that is enough and there is no need to have a fall-back implementation.

Author: > I guess the big part of the design I don't understand now is how the device code aborts a kernel when an assertion happens and then signals the host, telling it that the kernel has aborted.

When `__devicelib_assert_fail` implementation is available it's responsibility of Device-side Runtime to notify host. Aborting kernel execution isn't required.
When fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is used, DPCPP Runtime will read the assert buffer *after kernel finishes*.

>  Is the following description accurate?

Yes, it is for fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`.

> If that is the plan, I think we need to consider whether this is useful. Applications do not expect a failed `assert()` call to return, and the code that follows often won't execute if the assertion condition is false.

There was suggestion from @JoeyGIntel to split naming of `assert` macro for supported by Device-side Runtime `__devicelib_assert_fail` and the fallback one.

> If we plan native support for OpenCL and Level Zero, maybe that is enough and there is no need to have a fall-back implementation.

That may not be enough. An example use-case is when Device-side Runtime/Compiler can't support for fully-featured assert due to H/W limitations.

Reviewer: > When __devicelib_assert_fail implementation is available it's responsibility of Device-side Runtime to notify host. Aborting kernel execution isn't required.
> When fallback implementation of __devicelib_assert_fail is used, DPCPP Runtime will read the assert buffer after kernel finishes.

Why do you say that "aborting the kernel isn't necessary"?  My concern is that without some logic to abort the kernel, the kernel will often hang after an assert.  If it never finishes, the DPC++ runtime will never be notified, and then the user won't see the assert message.

> That may not be enough. An example use-case is when Device-side Runtime/Compiler can't support for fully-featured assert due to H/W limitations.

Do you know which of our H/W will have this limitation?

# Assert feature

**IMPORTANT**: This document is a draft.

> During debugging of kernel code user may put assertions here and there.
> The expected behaviour of assertion failure at host is application abort.
> Our choice for device-side assertions is asynchronous exception in order to
> allow for extensibility.
> 
> The user is free to disable assertions by defining `NDEBUG` macro at
> compile-time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the standard C++ `assert` API ("assertions") is an important debugging technique widely used by developers. This document describes the design of supporting assertions within SYCL device code. 
The basic approach we chose is delivering device-side assertions as host-side asynchronous exceptions, which allows further extensibility, such as better error handling or potential recovery.

As usual, device-side assertions can be disabled by defining `NDEBUG` macro at
compile time.
```

Author: Done

## Use-case example

```

> using namespace cl::sycl;

Author: Done.

auto ErrorHandler = [] (exception_list Exs) {
  for (exception_ptr const& E : Exs) {
    try {
      std::rethrow_exception(E);
    }
    catch (event_error const& Ex) {
      std::cout << “Exception - ” << Ex.what(); // assertion failed
      std::abort();
    }
  }
};

void user_func(item<2> Item) {
  assert((Item[0] % 2) && “Nil”);
}

int main() {
  queue Q(ErrorHandler);
  q.submit([&] (handler& CGH) {
    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel>(range<2>{N, M}, [=](item<2> It) {
      do_smth();
      user_func(It);
      do_smth_else();
    });
  });
  Q.wait_and_throw();
  std::cout << “One shouldn’t see this message.“;
  return 0;
}
```

In this use-case every work-item with even X dimension will trigger assertion
failure. Assertion failure should be reported via asynchronous exceptions. If
asynchronous exception handler is set the failure is reported with

> `cl::sycl::event_error` exception. Otherwise, SYCL Runtime should trigger abort.

Reviewer 2: Consider adding a new exception class specific for assert, it should be distinguishable from other exceptions.

Reviewer: See my comment elsewhere.  I suggest basing this extension spec on the SYCL 2020 exception model, where all SYCL exceptions have the same class.  I suggest creating a new exception error code to distinguish assertion failures from other exceptions.

Reviewer: Yes, I think an assertion failure should throw some new exception code.  I think @kbobrovs is saying that also.

Author: Added extension document with exception error code.

> At least one failed assertion should be reported. The assertion failure message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though multiple failures of the same or different assertions can happen in multiple workitems, implementation is required to deliver only one. The assertion failure message
```

Author: Done

is printed to `stderr` by SYCL Runtime.

> When multiple kernels are enqueued and both fail at assertion at least single
> assertion should be reported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When multiple kernels are enqueued and more than one fail at assertion, at least single
assertion failure should be reported.
```

Author: Done

## User requirements

From user's point of view there are the following requirements:

| # | Title | Description | Importance |
| - | ----- | ----------- | ---------- |
| 1 | Handle assertion failure | Signal about assertion failure via SYCL asynchronous exception | Must have |
| 2 | Print assert message | Assert function should print message to stderr at host | Must have |
| 3 | Stop under debugger | When debugger is attached, break at assertion point | Highly desired |
| 4 | Reliability | Assert failure should be reported regardless of kernel deadlock | Highly desired |

> 

Author: Done

## Contents of `cl::sycl::event_error`

Interface of `cl::sycl::event_error` should look like:
```
class event_error : public runtime_error {
public:
  event_error() = default;

  event_error(const char *Msg, cl_int Err)
      : event_error(string_class(Msg), Err) {}

  event_error(const string_class &Msg, cl_int Err) : runtime_error(Msg, Err) {}
};
```

Regardless of whether asynchronous exception handler is set or not, there's an
action to be performed by SYCL Runtime. To achieve this, information about
assert failure should be propagated from device-side to SYCL Runtime. This
should be performed via calls to `clGetEventInfo` for OpenCL backend and
`zeEventQueryStatus` for Level-Zero backend.

## Terms

 - Device-side Runtime - part of device-code, which is supplied by Device-side

>    Compiler.

Author: Applied suggested wording.

 - Device-side Compiler - compiler which generates device-native binary image
   based on input SPIR-V image.

>  - Low-level Runtime - the backend/runtime behind DPCPP Runtime.

Author: Done

 - Accessor metadata - parts of accessor representation at device-side: pointer,
   ranges, offset.

## How it works?

> For the time being, `assert(expr)` macro ends up in call to

Reviewer 2: _For the time being_ sounds like temporary solution. Is it? If so, what's the long-term? If not, please rephrase.

`__devicelib_assert_fail` function. This function is part of [Device library extension](extensions/C-CXX-StandardLibrary/DeviceLibExtensions.rst#cl_intel_devicelib_cassert).
Device code already contains call to the function. Currently, a device-binary
is always linked against fallback implementation.

> ### Device-specific approach

Reviewer 2: I think the key differentiator between the "device specific" and "device agnostic" approaches is really the reliability. So I suggest to call them accordingly. E.g. "safe", "main", "primary" vs "fallback", "secondary".

Author: Employed safe-fallback wording.

> Device-side compiler/linker provides their implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`
> and prefer this implementation over fallback one.
> 
> If Device-side Runtime supports `__devicelib_assert_fail` then Low-Level Runtime
> is responsible for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the preferred approach and implementations should use it when possible. It guarantees assertion failure notification delivery to the host regardless of kernel behavior which hit the assertion. 

The Native Device Compiler is responsible for providing implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` which completely hides details of communication between the device code and the Low-Level Runtime from the SYCL device compiler and runtime. The Low-Level Runtime is responsible for:
```

Author: Done.

 - detecting if assert failure took place;
 - flushing assert message to `stderr` on host.
When detected, Low-level Runtime reports assert failure to DPCPP Runtime

> at synchronization points.

Reviewer 2: Is `synchronization points` the concept from SYCL2020 `3.9.8.1. Synchronization in the SYCL application`?
This does not seem like "asynchronous"  to me (which is claimed in the requirements). Moreover, most of the sync points will not be reached if the kernel hangs. The only one which potentially can be reached is the "SYCL event objects". Not sure what spec means by that, but probably event polling.
Requirement to do event polling would contradict the suggested async delivery via async exception. This is one of the key design points, I believe, and should be clarified.

Author: Changed to `event objects`.

asynchronous exceptions, which allows further extensibility, such as better
error handling or potential recovery.

As usual, device-side assertions can be disabled by defining `NDEBUG` macro at
compile time.

## Use-case example

```
using namespace sycl;
auto ErrorHandler = [] (exception_list Exs) {
  for (exception_ptr const& E : Exs) {
    try {
      std::rethrow_exception(E);
    }
    catch (event_error const& Ex) {
      std::cout << “Exception - ” << Ex.what(); // assertion failed
      std::abort();
    }
  }
};

void user_func(item<2> Item) {
  assert((Item[0] % 2) && “Nil”);
}

int main() {
  queue Q(ErrorHandler);
  q.submit([&] (handler& CGH) {
    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel>(range<2>{N, M}, [=](item<2> It) {
      do_smth();
      user_func(It);
      do_smth_else();
    });
  });
  Q.wait_and_throw();
  std::cout << “One shouldn’t see this message.“;
  return 0;
}
```

In this use-case every work-item with even X dimension will trigger assertion
failure. Assertion failure should be reported via asynchronous exceptions. If
asynchronous exception handler is set the failure is reported with

> `sycl::event_error` exception. Otherwise, SYCL Runtime should trigger abort.

Reviewer 3: Note: [SYCL 2020](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#subsubsec:exception.nohandler) already defines behavior of async exceptions without an `async_handler` - will it work for us if we re-use that default behavior or we still want to customize it for this particular exception type?

Reviewer: I hope we do not need to specify special behavior for this exception.  It seems to me that the default behavior is what we want: it causes the program to terminate if there is no handler.

Author: No need to customize.
The default behaviour works fine for us.

Even though multiple failures of the same or different assertions can happen in
multiple workitems, implementation is required to deliver only one. The

> assertion failure message is printed to `stderr` by SYCL Runtime.

Reviewer 3: Does it happen always or only without `async_handler` set?

Reviewer: I think it should always print the assertion message because:

* This would be consistent with the "safe" implementation (the one that depends on hardware support), which is defined to print the message even before notifying the host.

* This is also consistent with the way `assert` works on the host, which prints the assertion message even before raising `SIGABRT`.

Reviewer 3: So, even if user set an `async_handler` in order to gracefully react to `assert` failure, we still print something to `stderr`? What for? It is not that bad as if we printed into `stdout`, but still seems unnecessary a bit.

Reviewer: I thought it was weird when I first read this spec also.  But then I tried the following test:

```
#include <cassert>
#include <csignal>
#include <cstdlib>

void handle(int sig) {
  std::exit(0);  // Exit silently
}

int main() {
  std::signal(SIGABRT, handle);
  assert(false);
}
```

The results:

```
$ clang -std=c++17 -pedantic -o t t.cpp
$ ./t
t: t.cpp:11: int main(): Assertion `false' failed.
$ echo $?
0
```

Despite the fact that I catch the SIGABRT and exit without printing anything, I still get a message printed to stderr.

Therefore, it seems like the behavior defined in this spec is consistent with the way `assert` works on the host.

Author: That's kind of obvious due to the fact that `assert(expr)` on host is unwrapped into
```
if (!(expr)) {
  fprintf(stderr, ...);
  abort();
}
```

In device-code, `assert(expr)` unwraps to:
```
if (!(expr)) {
  __devicelib_assert_fail(#expr, __FILE__, __LINE__, __PRETTY_FUNCTION__, global ID, local ID);
}
```

When multiple kernels are enqueued and more than one fail at assertion, at least
single assertion should be reported.

## User requirements

From user's point of view there are the following requirements:

| # | Title | Description | Importance |
| - | ----- | ----------- | ---------- |
| 1 | Handle assertion failure | Signal about assertion failure via SYCL asynchronous exception | Must have |
| 2 | Print assert message | Assert function should print message to stderr at host | Must have |
| 3 | Stop under debugger | When debugger is attached, break at assertion point | Highly desired |
| 4 | Reliability | Assert failure should be reported regardless of kernel deadlock | Highly desired |

Implementations without enough capabilities to implement fourth requirement are
allowed to realize the fallback approach described below, which does not
guarantee assertion failure delivery to host, but is still useful in many
practical cases.

## Contents of `sycl::event_error`

Interface of `sycl::event_error` should look like:
```

> class event_error : public runtime_error {

Reviewer 3: Note: [SYCL 2020](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#subsec:exception.class) used different approach for exceptions: instead of several sub-classes, there is now just a single `sycl::exception` class, which contains an error code describing what happened wrong

Author: Added extension document for assert error code

should be performed via calls to `piEventGetInfo`. This Plugin Interface call
"lowers" to `clGetEventInfo` for OpenCL backend and `zeEventQueryStatus` for
Level-Zero backend.

## Terms

 - Device-side Runtime - runtime library supplied by the Native Device Compiler
   and running on the device.
 - Native Device Compiler - compiler which generates device-native binary image
   based on input SPIR-V image.
 - Low-level Runtime - the backend/runtime behind DPCPP Runtime attached via the
   Plugin Interface.
 - Accessor metadata - parts of accessor representation at device-side: pointer,
   ranges, offset.

## How it works?

`assert(expr)` macro ends up in call to `__devicelib_assert_fail`. This function
is part of [Device library extension](extensions/C-CXX-StandardLibrary/DeviceLibExtensions.rst#cl_intel_devicelib_cassert).

Implementation of this function is supplied by Native Device Compiler for
safe approach or by DPCPP Compiler for fallback one.

Due to lack of support of online linking in Level-Zero, the application is
linked against fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`. Hence,
Native Device Compilers should prefer their implementation instead of the one

> provided in incoming SPIR-V/LLVM IR binary.

Reviewer 3: I wonder how is this will be implemented? Are we going to support `weak` linkage type for that? Or `weak` is just implied by the function name? The latter seems a bit hacky - I suggest that we just fix online linking in Level Zero instead

Author: I think either explicit weak linking marker for fallback devicelib implementation could work fine for us.

Reviewer 3: Then you have one more dependency: there is no `weak` linkage type available in SPIR-V spec

Reviewer: Maybe we can get online linking support in time for this feature?

Author: Removed this paragraph.

single device.

The `__store_assert_failure()` built-in atomically sets a flag in a buffer. The
buffer is accessed using accessor metadata from program-scope variable. This
built-in return a boolean value which is `true` if the flag is set by this call
to `__store_assert_failure()` and `false` if the flag was already set.
Motivation for using atomic operation is the same as with `__store_acc()`
builtin.

The following pseudo-code snippets shows how these built-ins are used.
First of all, assume the following code as user's one:
```
void user_func(int X) {
  assert(X && “X is nil”);
}

int main() {
  queue Q(...);
  Q.submit([&] (handler& CGH) {
    CGH.single_task([=] () {
      do_smth();
      user_func(0);
      do_smth_else();
    });
  });
  ...
}
```

The following LLVM IR pseudo code will be generated for the user's code:
```
@AssertBufferPtr = global void* null
@AssertBufferAccessRange = ...
@AssertBufferMemoryRange = ...
@AssertBufferOffset = ...

/// user's code
void user_func(int X) {
if (!(X && “X is nil")) {
    __assert_fail(...);
  }
}

users_kernel(...) {
  do_smth()
  user_func(0);
  do_smth_else();
}

> /// a wrapped user's kernel

Reviewer 3: Could you please clarify at which level/in which component this wrapped kernel is being created? Will it be created somewhere in DPC++ headers or will it be generated by DPC++ FE?

Author: Added

kernel(AssertBufferAccessor, OtherArguments...) {
  __store_acc(AssertBufferAccessor);
  users_kernel(OtherArguments...);
}

/// __assert_fail belongs to Linux version of devicelib
void __assert_fail(...) {
  ...
  __devicelib_assert_fail(...);
}

void __devicelib_assert_fail(Expr, File, Line, GlobalID, LocalID) {
  ...
  if (__store_assert_info())
    printf("Assertion `%s' failed in %s at line %i. GlobalID: %i, LocalID: %i",

>            Expr, File, Line, GlobalID, LocalID);

Reviewer: This may be a silly question, but do we have device side printf()?  I would have expected this string to be written to the assert buffer, so the DPC++ runtime could retrieve and print it.

Author: Yes, we do have a device-side `printf`.
Can't see use-case when fetching the message is required.
Does it look inconsistent with the assert exception throw?

Reviewer: > Does it look inconsistent with the assert exception throw?

This is an interesting question.  What string does the exception contain?  I.e. what does the application get if it calls `e.what()` on that exception?

Author: From my point of view a generic message like `Assert had happened` will be enough for return value of `e.what()`.
For the time being, `assert` prints the following to `stderr`:
```
<file>:<line>: <function>: global id: [%lu,%lu,%lu], local id: [%lu,%lu,%lu] Assertion `<expr>` failed.
```

Author: Added to doc.

   ranges, offset.

## How it works?

`assert(expr)` macro ends up in call to `__devicelib_assert_fail`. This function
is part of [Device library extension](extensions/C-CXX-StandardLibrary/DeviceLibExtensions.rst#cl_intel_devicelib_cassert).

Format of assert failure message, printed to `stderr` is the following:
```
<file>:<line>: <function>: global id: [<gid0>,<gid1>,<gid2>], local id: [<lid0>,<lid1>,<lid2>] Assertion `<expr>` failed.
```

Implementation of this function is supplied by Native Device Compiler for
safe approach or by DPCPP Compiler for fallback one.

NB: Due to lack of support of online linking in Level-Zero, the application is
linked against fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`. Hence,
Native Device Compilers should prefer their implementation instead of the one
provided in incoming SPIR-V/LLVM IR binary.

Limitations for user:
 - DPCPP RT, Low-level RT and device state is unknown after throwing of "assert"
   asynchronous exception;
 - "assert" asynchronous exception might not be recoverable;
 - there might not be guarantees on enqueueing commands (kernel, copy, etc.) to

>    same queue/context: guarantees may vary with device/Low-level RT.

Author: Provided details

### Safe approach

This is the preferred approach and implementations should use it when possible.
It guarantees assertion failure notification delivery to the host regardless of
kernel behavior which hit the assertion.

The Native Device Compiler is responsible for providing implementation of
`__devicelib_assert_fail` which completely hides details of communication
between the device code and the Low-Level Runtime from the SYCL device compiler
and runtime. The Low-Level Runtime is responsible for:
 - detecting if assert failure took place;
 - flushing assert message to `stderr` on host.

When detected, Low-level Runtime reports assert failure to DPCPP Runtime

> via events objects. To achieve this, information about assert failure should be

Reviewer 2: please elaborate the sequence of what happens and when:
1) assertion hit
2) device immediately sends signal to low-level runtime
3) other gpu threads continue to run
4) low-level runtime immediately receives the signal (in some async thread?) prints the message and updates event status
5) How SYCL runtime detects the event status changed? Separate polling thread which does piEventGetInfo?
If no separate thread, then how - upon subsequent enqueue into exec graph? Does runtime also marks the event as finished immediately after signal is received?
as I noted before, this is the key functional part of the safe approach design, and it should be crystal clear, I believe.

Author: Added

# Assert feature

**IMPORTANT**: This document is a draft.

Using the standard C++ `assert` API ("assertions") is an important debugging
technique widely used by developers. This document describes the design of
supporting assertions within SYCL device code.
The basic approach we chose is delivering device-side assertions as host-side
asynchronous exceptions, which allows further extensibility, such as better
error handling or potential recovery.

As usual, device-side assertions can be disabled by defining `NDEBUG` macro at
compile time.

## Use-case example

```

> using namespace sycl;

Reviewer: Suggest adding the include files also to illustrate that the application needs to include `<cassert>` too:

```
#include <cassert>
#include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
```

Author: Added

auto ErrorHandler = [] (exception_list Exs) {

>   for (exception_ptr const& E : Exs) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for (std::exception_ptr const& E : Exs) {
```

    try {
      std::rethrow_exception(E);
    }

>     catch (event_error const& Ex) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    catch (const exception & Ex) {
```

Author: Fixed.

>       std::cout << “Exception - ” << Ex.what(); // assertion failed
>       std::abort();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      if (Ex.code() == errc::ext_oneapi_assert) {
        std::cout << "Exception - " << Ex.what(); // assertion failed
        std::abort();
      }
```

Author: Fixed.

  queue Q;
  buffer B;

  Q.submit([](handler &H) {
    auto Acc = B.get_access<read_write>(H);
    H.parallel_for(/* range */, [](item It) {
      int X = calculus(0); // should fail assertion
      assert(X && "Nil in result");
      Acc[It] = X;
    });
  });

  enqueueKernel(Q, B);
  ...
}
```

These two files are compiled into a single binary application. There are four
states of definedness of `NDEBUG` macro available:

| # | `impl.cpp` | `main.cpp` |
| - | ---------- | ---------- |
| 1 | defined    | defined    |
| 2 | defined    | undefined  |
| 3 | undefined  | defined    |
| 4 | undefined  | undefined  |

States of definedness of `NDEBUG` macro defines the set of assertions which can
fail. Having assertions enabled in at least one translation unit with device
code requires for `isAssertEnabled` property set being present in device image
descriptor structure.

### Raising assert failure flag and reading it on host

Each and every translation unit provided by user should have `extern`
declaration of `AssertHappenedMem` i.e. DPCPP headers includes appropriate file
with [declaration](#prog-scope-var-decl).

The definition is only provided within devicelib along with

> `__devicelib_assert_fail` function which raises the flag.

Author: This sounds reasonable. Though, it'll require declaring of `__devicelib_assert_read` function. Either way, there's a declaration which should be available to SYCL headers.

I see, how you came to this point. Though, one should be aware, that devicelib's declarations aren't available to SYCL headers. The wrappers from devicelib are provided with help from frontend. @jinge90 can provide more details here.
Long story short, there still should be a declaration of callable or accessible object in SYCL headers.

> `__devicelib_assert_fail` function which raises the flag.

Author: Changed to suggested description.

Implementations without enough capabilities to implement fourth requirement are
allowed to realize the fallback approach described below, which does not
guarantee assertion failure delivery to host, but is still useful in many
practical cases.

## Terms

 - Device-side Runtime - runtime library supplied by the Native Device Compiler
   and running on the device.
 - Native Device Compiler - compiler which generates device-native binary image
   based on input SPIR-V image.
 - Low-level Runtime - the backend/runtime behind DPCPP Runtime attached via the
   Plugin Interface.

## How it works?

`assert(expr)` macro ends up in call to `__devicelib_assert_fail`. This function
is part of [Device library extension](extensions/C-CXX-StandardLibrary/DeviceLibExtensions.rst#cl_intel_devicelib_cassert).

The format of the assert message is unspecified, but it will always include the
text of the failing expression, the values of the standard macros `__FILE__` and
`__LINE__`, and the value of the standard variable `__func__`. If the failing
assert comes from an `nd_range` `parallel_for` it will also include the global

> ID and the local ID of the failing work item.

Reviewer 4: If you have an assertion that occurs in a device function that is called from multiple different kernels, some which are parallel_for and some which are not, how can you know when to put in global and local ID in string?

Author: In fallback implementation, the way assert message gets reported to host remains unchanged. For the time being, local/global IDs are put to string with help of SPIR-V built-ins.
For safe implementation, its responsibility of device-side runtime to choose if local/global IDs are needed and to get proper values.

Reviewer 4: How can the device-side runtime know/choose if local/global IDs are needed?

Author: Sorry, my bad.
> In fallback implementation, the way assert message gets reported to host remains unchanged. For the time being, local/global IDs are put to string with help of SPIR-V built-ins.
For safe implementation, it's responsibility of device-side runtime to choose if local/global IDs are needed and to get proper values.

The last sentence is wrong here as global and local IDs are fetched by wrapper in `libsycl-crt` regardless of safe/fallback implementation use.
One can see the wrapper's implementation here: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/libdevice/crt_wrapper.cpp#L43

Implementation of this function is supplied by Native Device Compiler for
safe approach or by DPCPP Compiler for fallback one.

In order to distinguish which implementation to use, DPCPP Runtime checks for
`cl_intel_devicelib_cassert` extension. If the extension isn't available, then
fallback implementation is used.

## Safe approach

This is the preferred approach and implementations should use it when possible.
It guarantees assertion failure notification delivery to the host regardless of
kernel behavior which hit the assertion.

The Native Device Compiler is responsible for providing implementation of
`__devicelib_assert_fail` which completely hides details of communication
between the device code and the Low-Level Runtime from the SYCL device compiler
and runtime. The Low-Level Runtime is responsible for:
 - detecting if assert failure took place;

>  - flushing assert message to `stderr` on host.

Reviewer 2: The intro paragraph contradicts to the last bullet:

> The assertion failure message is printed to `stderr` by DPCPP Runtime.

Author: Fixed

The following sequence of events describes how user code gets notified:
 - Device side:
   1. Assert fails in device-code in kernel
      // It's not defined if GPU thread stops execution
      // Other GPU threads are left untouched
   2. Specialized version of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is called
   3. Device immediately signals to host (Low-Level Runtime)
 - Host side:
   1. The assert failure gets detected by Low-Level Runtime
   2. Low-Level Runtime prints assert failure message to `stderr`
   3. Low-Level Runtime calls `abort()`

## Fallback approach

> If Device-side Runtime doesn't support `__devicelib_assert_fail` then a fallback

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Device-side Runtime doesn't support `__devicelib_assert_fail` (as reported via PI_INTEL_DEVICELIB_CASSERT extension query) then a fallback
```

approach comes in place. The approach doesn't require any support from
Device-side Runtime and Native Device Compiler. Neither it does from Low-level
Runtime.

Within this approach, a mutable program scope variable is introduced. This
variable stores a flag which says if an assert failure was encountered. Fallback
implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` atomically raises the flag so that
DPCPP Runtime is able to detect assert failure after kernel finishes.

The following sequence of events describes how user code gets notified:
 - Device side:
   1. Assert fails in device-code in kernel
   2. Fallback version of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is called
   3. Assert information is stored into program-scope variable
   4. Kernel continues running
 - Host side:
   1. A copy 'kernel' is enqueued as the one depending on user's kernel to get
      the value of assert failure flag.
   2. A host-task is enqueued to check value of assert failure flag.
   3. The host task calls abort whenever assert failure flag is set.

> 

Reviewer 2: For device side it is clear that with NDEBUG there is no overhead. For host side it is not quite. From reading below I can see that the 3 items above happen only if the device code has asserts enabled, so:
```suggestion
DPCPP Runtime will automatically check if assertions are enabled in the kernel being run, and won't enqueue the auxiliary kernels if assertions are not enabled. So there is no host-side runtime overhead when assertion are not enabled.
```

Illustrating this with an example, lets assume the user enqueues three kernels:
 - `Kernel #1`
 - `Kernel #2`
 - `Kernel #3`, which depends on `Kernel #1`

The resulting graph will look like this: ![graph](images/assert-fallback-graph.svg)

### Interface to program scope variable

Multiple translation units could be compiled/linked into a single device binary
image. All of them should have `extern` declaration of program scope variable
available. Definition of the variable is only available within devicelib in the

> same binary image where fallback `__devicelib_assert_fail` resides.

Reviewer 2: Is this unconditional or only when there is no NDEBUG? Please clarify in the text.

Author: Fixed.

<a name="prog-scope-var-decl">The variable has the following structure and
declaration:</a>

```c++

> struct AssertHappened {

Reviewer 2: Is this variable source-level or generated by device compiler? If source, it should be mangled (__SYCL_...) or put into a namespace.

Author: The variable is source-level, i.e. it's declared and defined in the source explicitly. I've put it into namespace.

  int Flag = 0;
};

#ifdef __SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__
extern SYCL_GLOBAL_VAR AssertHappened AssertHappenedMem;
#endif
```

Here, `SYCL_GLOBAL_VAR` is a macro which wraps special attribute to allow for
mutable program-scope variable.

The reference to extern variable is resolved within online-linking against
fallback devicelib.

### Online-linking fallback `__devicelib_assert_fail`

Online linking against fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is
performed only when assertion is enabled and Device-side Runtime doesn't provide
implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`.

In DPCPP headers one can see if assert is enabled with status of `NDEBUG` macro
with `#ifdef`'s. This allows to enqueue a copy kernel and host task. The copy
kernel will copy `AssertHappenedMem` to host and host-task will check the `Flag`
value and `abort()` as needed.

When in DPCPP Runtime Library this knowledge is obtained from device binary

> image descriptor's property sets.

Reviewer 2: Not clear if the enqueueing of these auxiliary kernels happens from under #ifndef NDEBUG, or after checking the property. Please clarify here.

Author: Clarified.

> Each device image is supplied with an array of property sets:

Reviewer 2: I don't think the design of device binary image properties should be repeated here. A link to source code or design doc would suffice.

Author: Replaced the description with link to header file

```c++
struct pi_device_binary_struct {
  //...
  // Array of property sets
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsBegin;
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsEnd;
};
```
Each property set is represented by the following struct:
```c++
// Named array of properties.
struct _pi_device_binary_property_set_struct {
  char *Name;                                // the name
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesBegin; // array start
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesEnd;   // array end
};
```
It contains name of property set and array of properties. Each property is
represented by the following struct:
```c++
struct _pi_device_binary_property_struct {
  char *Name;       // null-terminated property name
  void *ValAddr;    // address of property value
  uint32_t Type;    // _pi_property_type
  uint64_t ValSize; // size of property value in bytes
};
```

> A distinct property set `SYCL/assert used` is added. In this set a property

Reviewer 3: I'm okay to have this separate property set for now, but for a longer-term, I would like to unify this with handling of other SYCL 2020 aspects somehow.

This doesn't map 1:1 to existing aspects like `fp16`, because our intent is to provide the assert functionality regardless of device support for it. However, internally it might make sense to treat a call to assert as an aspect usage to unify the collection of aspects used in each kernel and minimize the amount of property sets.

Regardless of how it will be implemented, I think that it makes sense to add `native_assert`/`safe_assert` aspect to the SYCL extension specification, so users are able to check device capabilities and build their expectations from assert-based debugging accordingly.

Reviewer: I plan to propose a property set named ""SYCL/kernel reqs", which hold requirements for each kernel.  My plan was to store each kernel's set of required aspects here, and also any requirements from `[[reqd_work_group_size()]]` and `[[reqd_sub_group_size()]]` attributes.  Possibly, we could use this property set also to tell whether a kernel needs support for assertions.

> Regardless of how it will be implemented, I think that it makes sense to add native_assert/safe_assert aspect to the SYCL extension specification, so users are able to check device capabilities and build their expectations from assert-based debugging accordingly.

I wonder if this would really be useful, though.  Are you thinking that applications may choose to disable assertions unless the device had native support?  Do we think that is likely?

I'm not opposed to adding the assertion, but I think we should only do so if we see a reasonable usage model for it.

Author: I didn't get the resolution here.
Is the following needed?

> Regardless of how it will be implemented, I think that it makes sense to add native_assert/safe_assert aspect to the SYCL extension specification, so users are able to check device capabilities and build their expectations from assert-based debugging accordingly.

Author: @gmlueck , @AlexeySachkov , a friendly ping on question above

Reviewer: @AlexeySachkov, I think the question is to you.  If it were me, I think I'd wait until there is a user request for an aspect like `native_assert`.  However, I'm not opposed to adding it if you think there is a real use case.

Reviewer: > I plan to propose a property set named ""SYCL/kernel reqs", which hold requirements for each kernel. My plan was to store each kernel's set of required aspects here, and also any requirements from [[reqd_work_group_size()]] and [[reqd_sub_group_size()]] attributes. Possibly, we could use this property set also to tell whether a kernel needs support for assertions.

Responding to my own comment.  I have now submitted a design document which adds the property set named "SYCL/requirements".  I think you could use this to say whether each kernel uses assertions.  See #3781.

Reviewer 3: @gmlueck,

> I wonder if this would really be useful, though. Are you thinking that applications may choose to disable assertions unless the device had native support? Do we think that is likely?

I'm not sure that someone will disable assertions if native support is not available, but as a developer who added an assertion which didn't fire even if it should have been, I think I would appreciate some indicator somewhere which tells me: assertions are emulated and might not work properly in complex code. So I move on to other debugging mechanisms like printf/streams/writing to extra buffer/using actual debugger sooner rather than exploring my code once again trying to find out what went wrong at which stage so my `assert(false)` is not being displayed.

Reviewer: I agree that there is a danger that users will be confused when the fall-back approach doesn't work and an assertion failure goes unreported.  However, I'm not sure that adding a new aspect will solve that problem.  I guess you're thinking that an application could test the aspect and then print a warning message about assertions being unreliable?  It seems unlikely to me that many people would do this, but who knows.

Here are some other possible solutions, but none look great to me:

* The runtime could print a warning message whenever a kernel that uses assertions is submitted to a device that doesn't support them natively.  However, I think users will complain about seeing the warning message all the time.

* The runtime could print a warning as above, but only if the kernel doesn't complete within X time.  This would reduce the frequency of the messages to only long-running kernels.

* We could create a new environment variable which needs to be set in order to print the warning.  However, I suspect that few people would think set the environment variable.

Reviewer 3: What about having some tool which prints that info about the device? It could be `sycl-ls` (launched with some option), which we already ship it and we could extend some documentation saying that this tool can also be used to print various device capabilities to explore your platform in more details.

Reviewer 3: > I guess you're thinking that an application could test the aspect and then print a warning message about assertions being unreliable?

As I developer, I would quickly hack my app to print that info to get a clue of what could go wrong - this is the use case I imagine. IDEs could somehow obtain this info as well through a tool to show some hints right next to assertions

Reviewer: > What about having some tool which prints that info about the device? It could be sycl-ls [...]

This seems reasonable.  We would need an aspect to enable this, and that would also enable the other use cases you describe.  Now we just need to decide on a name for the aspect.  How about:

```
enum class aspect {
  // ...
  ext_intel_native_assert
};
```

If we decide to add this, it should go in the extension specification document (SYCL_ONEAPI_ASSERT.asciidoc).

Author: Added aspect to extension.

>Responding to my own comment. I have now submitted a design document which adds the property set named "SYCL/requirements". I think you could use this to say whether each kernel uses assertions. See #3781.

Will change to "SYCL/requirements" after #3781 merge.

> with the name of the kernel is added whenever the kernel uses assert. Use of
> assert is detected through call to `__devicelib_assert_fail` function after
> linking device binary image with wrapper device library (the `libsycl-crt`
> library).
> 
> The property set and the underlying properties are added by `sycl-post-link`
> tool with help of building callgraph for each and every kernel in device binary
> image.

Reviewer 2: Seems not quite clear.
```suggestion
with the name of the kernel is added whenever the kernel uses assert. The use of
assert is detected by a specific LLVM IR pass invoked by the `sycl-post-link` tool which
runs on linked device code, i.e. after linking with the `libsycl-crt` library which defines the assert function.
The pass builds complete call graph for a kernel, and sees if there is a call to `__devicelib_assert_fail`
anywhere in the graph. If found, `sycl-post-link` adds the property for the kernel.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Besides, it is not always possible to build a callgraph, so, this should be implemented too:
```suggestion
The same is done for all indirectly callable functions (marked with specific attribute) found in the linked device code.
Those are functions whose pointers can be taken and passed around in device code. If a callgraph for any such
function has a call to `__devicelib_assert_fail`, then all kernels in the module are conservatively marked as using asserts.
```

Reviewer: @kbobrovs: This is probably not how it will work.  My understanding is that the extension to allow indirect calls in device code is not yet complete or approved.  Last time we talked about this in the language evolution group, we identify ways to narrow down the set of functions that could possibly be called from any one call site.  I expect that all parts of DPC++ that need to form a static call graph will use these techniques to limit the call graph when there are indirect function calls.

Since the indirect function call extension isn't finished yet, it seems better to me that we don't speculate here on how we will handle that case.

Reviewer 2: @gmlueck, in future - maybe, but I'm looking at today's function pointers implementation which works and needs to be covered by this design. Once something changes with function pointers spec, we will update.

Alternatively, the design can mention that the callgraph may be inaccurate in presence of function pointers, and compiler must mark a kernel as "using assert" always, unless it can prove (using future language hints or analysis) that the kernel can never call an indirectly callable function whose (possibly inaccurate) callgraph contains a call to `__devicelib_assert_fail`.

Author: Added suggested description.

  int Expected = 0;
  int Desired = 1;

  if (atomic_CAS(&AssertHappenedMem.Flag, Expected, Desired))
    printf("Assertion `%s' failed in %s at line %i. GlobalID: %i, LocalID: %i",
           Expr, File, Line, GlobalID, LocalID);
}
```

#### Compiling with assert enabled/disabled

Consider the following example sources:
```c++
// impl.cpp
using namespace sycl;
int calculus(int X) {
  assert(X && "Invalid value");
  return X * 2;
}

void enqueueKernel(queue &Q, buffer &B) {
  Q.submit([](handler &H) {
    auto Acc = B.get_access<read_write>(H);
    H.parallel_for(/* range */, [](item It) {
      assert(Acc[It]);
      // ...
    });
  });
}

// main.cpp
// ...
using namespace sycl;

SYCL_EXTERNAL int calculus(int);
void enqueueKernel(queue&, buffer&);

void workload() {
  queue Q;
  buffer B;

  Q.submit([](handler &H) {
    auto Acc = B.get_access<read_write>(H);
    H.parallel_for(/* range */, [](item It) {
      int X = calculus(0); // should fail assertion
      assert(X && "Nil in result");
      Acc[It] = X;
    });
  });

  enqueueKernel(Q, B);
  ...
}
```

These two files are compiled into a single binary application. There are four

> states of definedness of `NDEBUG` macro available:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
states of definition of `NDEBUG` macro available:
```

Author: Fixed.

| # | `impl.cpp` | `main.cpp` |
| - | ---------- | ---------- |
| 1 | defined    | defined    |
| 2 | defined    | undefined  |
| 3 | undefined  | defined    |
| 4 | undefined  | undefined  |

States of definedness of `NDEBUG` macro defines the set of assertions which can
fail.

### Raising assert failure flag and reading it on host

> Each and every translation unit provided by user should have declaration of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All translation units provided by the user should have a declaration of the
```

Author: Fixed.

assert flag read function available:
```c++
int __devicelib_assert_read(void);
```
Also, the [AssertHappened](#prog-scope-var-decl) structure type should be
available for the copier kernel.

The definition is only provided within devicelib along with
`__devicelib_assert_fail` function which raises the flag.

Reading of assert failure flag is performed with the help of auxiliary kernel
which is enqueued as dependent on user's one. The flag state is checked later
in host-task. This is achieved with approximately the following changes:

```c++
#include <assert_happened.hpp> // contains extern decl of AssertHappenedMem

#ifndef NDEBUG
class AssertFlagCopier;
#endif

class queue {
  template <typename T> event submit(T CGF) {
    event Event = submit_impl(CGF);

> #ifndef NDEBUG

Reviewer 2: queue::submit implementation is likely already located within sycl.so or can be moved there. If so, user will have asserts supported only with non-release builds of sycl runtime, because of this `#ifndef NDEBUG`. I don't think this code should be guarded by `NDEBUG`, as the `isAssertUsed(KernelName)` check is very lightweight and won't have any noticeable performance impact.

In return, we get user asserts working with any version of sycl.so.

Author: Implementation of `queue::submit` is header based due it is template.
This solution is chosen as easiest one to allow for copier kernel get represented in integration header when the user compiles an application.

Reviewer 2: My point is that we don't need NDEBUG check, as we already have the lightweight `if (!get_device()->assert_fail_supported() && isAssertUsed(KernelName))` guard. NDEBUG adds risks - we should not assume device code and host code is compiled with the same NDEBUG macro setting. Does removing NDEBUG breaks anything?

Reviewer 5: > NDEBUG adds risks - we should not assume device code and host code is compiled with the same NDEBUG macro setting.

I think it's assumed today and this might be a big feature to ask if feasible. Support different NDEBUG values for host and device compilation might lead to ODR violation for certain implementations of C++ standard library.
According to my understanding compiler tries to keep the same value for all macro-definitions except `__SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__` to make sure that both host and device compilers see the same code.
+@erichkeane, @AaronBallman, to comment on that.

Reviewer: Consider the case where a kernel calls some device function that is defined with `SYCL_EXTERNAL` in another translation unit.  The TU launching the kernel might be compiled with `NDEBUG` while the TU defining the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function might be compiled w/o `NDEBUG`.  In such a case, we still need to enable assertion handing in the call to `queue::submit()` despite the fact that this TU has `NDEBUG` defined.  Therefore, I think @kbobrovs's suggestion is the correct way.

Reviewer 5: @gmlueck, I think you are describing different scenario, where two different TUs are compiled by the *device* compiler with different NDEBUG value. I agree that this should be supported. My comment was about using different NDEBUG values while compiling the same TU by host and device compilers.

Reviewer: @bader, I agree that it is a different scenario, but I think it is a stronger motivation for making the change that @kbobrovs proposes.

Reviewer 6: Differing `NDEBUG` isn't itself traditionally a ODR violation, but gets you about 98% to one.  Libraries typically have to do a TON of work to make sure they don't go the other 2% if they decide to support that mechanism.  You'll note that the MSVC runtime libraries DON'T do any particular work, and instead just have you link with the one that matches your debug-setup.  The Linux libraries have to be pretty defensive of that.

In the SYCL host/device model, we consider both compiles to be the same 'translation unit' for a variety of reasons, AND we don't defend our libraries against `NDEBUG` anyway, so I think we should just as a policy consider that a violation.

Reviewer 7: > we should not assume device code and host code is compiled with the same NDEBUG macro setting.

That seems like an incredible amount of risk for very limited reward. The host and device code reside within the same source file, and users are used to thinking of source files as being the translation unit the compiler sees. SYCL plays a bit fast and loose with that notion, but I think the general rule should be that the host and device compilers see the same code. The alternative is a language that's really hard for users to reason about (with ODR violations likely as the result).

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is a risk, but this is how it is likely happen in real life. Is there really a big risk for SPIRV-based devices, or is it mostly for host/CPU device which may have connection points to the host code other than kernel invocation?

In any case, my proposal is removing the `#ifndef NDEBUG` from the `submit` function code which checks for `assert` presence in the device code. I wonder what additional risks does it incur?

Author: Removed use of `#ifdef` here. @gmlueck 's use-case sounds quite reasonable.

ID and the local ID of the failing work item.

Implementation of this function is supplied by Native Device Compiler for
safe approach or by DPCPP Compiler for fallback one.

NB: Due to lack of support of online linking in Level-Zero, the application is
linked against fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail`. Hence,
Native Device Compilers should prefer their implementation instead of the one
provided in incoming SPIR-V/LLVM IR binary.

## Safe approach

This is the preferred approach and implementations should use it when possible.
It guarantees assertion failure notification delivery to the host regardless of
kernel behavior which hit the assertion.

The Native Device Compiler is responsible for providing implementation of
`__devicelib_assert_fail` which completely hides details of communication
between the device code and the Low-Level Runtime from the SYCL device compiler
and runtime. The Low-Level Runtime is responsible for:
 - detecting if assert failure took place;
 - flushing assert message to `stderr` on host.

When detected, Low-level Runtime reports assert failure to DPCPP Runtime

> via events objects. To achieve this, information about assert failure should be

Reviewer 8: Agreed.  Now that the low level runtime is responsible for the abort, there is no longer any need for the low level runtime to pass information to the SYCL runtime via events.

OpenCL backend and `zeEventQueryStatus` for Level-Zero backend.

Refer to [OpenCL](extensions/Assert/opencl.md) and [Level-Zero](extensions/Assert/level-zero.md)
extensions.

The following sequence of events describes how user code gets notified:
 - Device side:
   1. Assert fails in device-code in kernel
      // It's not defined if GPU thread stops execution
      // Other GPU threads are left untouched
   2. Specialized version of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is called
   3. Device immediately signals to host (Low-Level Runtime)
 - Host side:
   1. The assert failure gets detected by Low-Level Runtime
   2. Low-Level Runtime prints assert failure message to `stderr`
   3. Low-Level Runtime calls `abort()`

### Fallback approach

If Device-side Runtime doesn't support `__devicelib_assert_fail` then a buffer
based approach comes in place. The approach doesn't require any support from
Device-side Runtime and Native Device Compiler. Neither it does from Low-level
Runtime.

Within this approach, a dedicated assert buffer is allocated and implicit kernel
argument is introduced. The argument is an accessor with `discard_read_write`

> or `discard_write` access mode. Accessor metadata is stored to program scope

Reviewer 8: How will this work considering that program-scope variables must be const or constexpr?  From the spec:
> Variables with static storage duration that are odr-used inside a device function, must be const or
> constexpr and zero-initialized or constant-initialized.

Isn't some of the accessor metadata not known until run time?

Reviewer 3: If I understand correctly, this limitation about `const` and `constexpr` was introduced because otherwise everyone can expect different results, like whether this non-const variable is shared between all work-items or not, whether changes to it on device side will be automatically propagated back to host, etc.

However, the idea here is to generate that global by the compiler - in this case we can overcome the limitation and we likely know what we are doing, so it should be safe

Reviewer 8: How will this information be conveyed to the device?  Will there by a global variable in the SPIR-V that the kernel writes to when it is first called?

variable. This allows to refer to the accessor without modifying each and every
user's function. Fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` restores
accessor metadata from program scope variable and writes assert information to
the assert buffer. Atomic operations are used in order to not overwrite existing
information.

DPCPP Runtime checks contents of the assert buffer for assert failure flag after
kernel finishes.

The following sequence of events describes how user code gets notified:
 - Device side:
   1. Assert fails in device-code in kernel
   2. Fallback version of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is called
   3. Assert information is stored into assert buffer
   4. Kernel continues running
 - Host side:
   1. A distinct thread is launched no later than the point of enqueue of the of

>       kernel with assertions

Reviewer 9: +1 Will requirements be met if we do checks on blocking calls?

>       kernel with assertions

Reviewer: I think we should be concerned about a thread spinning inside the DPC++ runtime whenever a kernel is active.  This wastes a CPU in the case where there is other useful work going on in the CPU.  Even if there is no other useful CPU work, it wastes power by keeping the CPU active, and this could be particularly important in a large HPC or datacenter system.

One solution is to check the buffer only when the DPC++ runtime normally to see if a kernel completes.  Does this only happen when the application makes a blocking call?  I think the infinite spin loop example that @s-kanaev shows above is probably not a realistic example.  Application code will eventually make a blocking call to know when its kernel completes.

Another solution is to have the internal spin loop, but ensure that it is blocked most of the time.  For example, it can call sleep() and only check the buffer very infrequently.

>       kernel with assertions

Author: >  Does this only happen when the application makes a blocking call?

he check can be performed with using of host-task also.

>       kernel with assertions

Reviewer 4: I think you could also just do this check every time the DPC++ runtime makes a call to the plugin, as a sort of wrapper at the beginning of the plug-in call.

   2. This thread polls the enqueued kernels for finish and checks the assert
      buffer for assert data
   3. If assert data is present DPCPP Runtime calls `abort()`

#### Online-linking fallback `__devicelib_assert_fail`

Online linking against fallback implementation of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is

> performed only when assertion is enabled.

Reviewer 3: I suggest that in our design we rely on actual device capabilities (for which we already have al queries in place) instead of introducing `weak` linkage type usage, which is not supported by any backend/spec yet. I understand that there are some concerns about Level Zero API, but if it is intended to support online linking per its definition, then it seems clearer to me to explicitly check whether fallback is needed or not instead of relying on `weak` linkage type

Author: Clarified, that online-linking is only performed when device-side runtime doesn't support the required extension.

with `#ifdef`'s. This allows to add implicit buffer argument to kernel
invocation. Here "implicit" means "implicit to the user".

When in DPCPP Runtime Library this knowledge is obtained from device binary
image descriptor's property sets.

Each device image is supplied with an array of property sets:
```c++
struct pi_device_binary_struct {
  //...
  // Array of property sets
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsBegin;
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsEnd;
};
```
Each property set is represented by the following struct:
```c++
// Named array of properties.
struct _pi_device_binary_property_set_struct {
  char *Name;                                // the name
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesBegin; // array start
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesEnd;   // array end
};
```
It contains name of property set and array of properties. Each property is
represented by the following struct:
```c++
struct _pi_device_binary_property_struct {
  char *Name;       // null-terminated property name
  void *ValAddr;    // address of property value
  uint32_t Type;    // _pi_property_type
  uint64_t ValSize; // size of property value in bytes
};
```

> Whenever `isAssertEnabled` property set is present, this specific device image

Reviewer 3: Instead of introducing the whole property set with a single property within it, I suggest that we re-use existing "misc" property set and just add an additional property `isAssertEnabled` there. For reference: #3072, #3131

Author: A bit below, the text says that no properties are expected in this set. Though, using miscellaneous property set sounds reasonable enough.

  Q.submit([](handler &H) {
    auto Acc = B.get_access<read_write>(H);
    H.parallel_for(/* range */, [](item It) {
      assert(Acc[It]);
      // ...
    });
  });
}

// main.cpp
// ...
using namespace sycl;

SYCL_EXTERNAL int calculus(int);
void enqueueKernel(queue&, buffer&);

void workload() {
  queue Q;
  buffer B;

  Q.submit([](handler &H) {
    auto Acc = B.get_access<read_write>(H);
    H.parallel_for(/* range */, [](item It) {
      int X = calculus(0); // should fail assertion
      assert(X && "Nil in result");
      Acc[It] = X;
    });
  });

  enqueueKernel(Q, B);
  ...
}
```

These two files are compiled into a single binary application. There are four
states of definedness of `NDEBUG` macro available:

| # | `impl.cpp` | `main.cpp` |
| - | ---------- | ---------- |
| 1 | defined    | defined    |
| 2 | defined    | undefined  |
| 3 | undefined  | defined    |
| 4 | undefined  | undefined  |

States of definedness of `NDEBUG` macro defines the set of assertions which can
fail. Having assertions enabled in at least one translation unit with device
code requires for `isAssertEnabled` property set being present in device image
descriptor structure.

> ### Storing accessor metadata and writing assert failure to buffer

Reviewer 3: Should it be a sub-section of "fallback approach", i.e. start with four `#`?

Both storing of accessor metadata and writing assert failure is performed with
help of built-ins. Implementations of these builtins are substituted by
frontend.

User's kernel is executed through a wrapper. Wrapping takes place in DPCPP
Runtime headers in a following manner:

```
class handler {

template <typename KernelName> parallel_for(KernelFunc, Range) {
#ifndef NDEBUG
  // Assert required
  if (!MQueue->get_device()->assert_fail_supported()) {
    using KName2 = class ASSERT_WRAPPER_NAME(KernelName);
    

>     auto AssertBufferAcc = MQueue->get_context()->getAssertBufferAccessor(this);

Reviewer 3: If I understand correctly, program scope variables in OpenCL are only persistent within a single OpenCL program, which means that this buffer should be created per device image: in case when device code split is enabled, each kernel could go into a separate device image, i.e. into a separate OpenCL program.

Author: Even though, the device images are distinct the allocation is the same within single context. This allows one to disregard splitness of device binaries.

The program-scope variable should be emitted for each and every device image which contains a kernel calling `__store_acc`/`__store_assert_info` built-ins.

Reviewer 3: > Even though, the device images are distinct the allocation is the same within single context. This allows one to disregard splitness of device binaries.

Oh, yes, mistaken program scope variable with the buffer. Please disregard my comment

    parallel_for_impl<KName2>(
      Range,
      [=](Item) {
        __store_acc(AssertBuffAcc);
        KernelFunc(Item);
      });
  } else {
#endif

     // (No assert required) OR (Assert supported by device)
     // ordinary enqueue process

> #ifndef NDEBUG

Reviewer 3: This effectively duplicates amount of kernels if assertions are enabled: even if device supports them natively, the device compiler still sees and emits the second version of kernel with fallback assert implementation. In combination with range rounding feature this increases original amount of kernels by 4x, which doesn't look right.

Would it be better to avoid kernels duplication here and just always instrument them with assert buffer regardless of native support for the feature? This will just increase arguments size by 24 bytes (If I recall correctly how huge accessor is) and we can also try and tune our dead argument elimination optimization to remove it completely.

Reviewer 8: This duplication would be absolutely devastating on FPGA where each additional copy of a kernel costs area on the chip even if it is never used.  We disable the range rounding feature on FPGA for precisely this reason.  

To specialize the kernel body code (but not the kernel arguments) you could use: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc.  The code would look something like this:

```c++
  kh.ext_oneapi_if_device_has<aspect::assert>([&]() {
    __store_acc(AssertBuffAcc);
  });
```

where kh is a kernel_handler object passed to the kernel lambda.  Since you'd need to also wrap your __store_assert_failure() in the same way you'd need to save the kernel_handler object in a program-scope global as well so that you don't have to pass it along to each function call.

Reviewer 9: As an option suggest avoiding changing original users kernels and instead introduce a helper kernel which sets global buffer to desired value. This kernel helper would need to be executed as initialization of a device program before any other kernel(aka global constructor).

    CGH.single_task([=] () {
      do_smth();
      user_func(0);
      do_smth_else();
    });
  });
  ...
}
```

The following LLVM IR pseudo code will be generated for the user's code:
```
@AssertBufferPtr = global void* null
@AssertBufferAccessRange = ...
@AssertBufferMemoryRange = ...
@AssertBufferOffset = ...

/// user's code
void user_func(int X) {
if (!(X && “X is nil")) {
    __assert_fail(...);
  }
}

users_kernel(...) {
  do_smth()
  user_func(0);
  do_smth_else();
}

/// a wrapped user's kernel
kernel(AssertBufferAccessor, OtherArguments...) {
  __store_acc(AssertBufferAccessor);
  users_kernel(OtherArguments...);
}

/// __assert_fail belongs to Linux version of devicelib
void __assert_fail(...) {
  ...
  __devicelib_assert_fail(...);
}

void __devicelib_assert_fail(Expr, File, Line, GlobalID, LocalID) {
  ...
  if (__store_assert_info())
    printf("Assertion `%s' failed in %s at line %i. GlobalID: %i, LocalID: %i",
           Expr, File, Line, GlobalID, LocalID);
}

/// The following are built-ins provided by frontend
void __store_acc(accessor) {
  %1 = accessor.getPtr();
  store void * %1, void * @AssertBufferPtr
}

bool __store_assert_info(...) {

>   AssertBAcc = __fetch_acc();

Reviewer 3: This built-in is not mentioned above. I also think that it might be easier for FE to just provide a single built-in, which returns an address of a global variable - the rest of operations could be done in DPC++ Headers or within the assert fallback implementation, including the atomic update of that buffer.

Moreover, if you introduce a way for SYCL kernel function to access non-const global variable (for example only ones which are marked with special attribute) then you can implement all built-ins entirely in DPC++ Headers

Author: > Moreover, if you introduce a way for SYCL kernel function to access non-const global variable (for example only ones which are marked with special attribute) then you can implement all built-ins entirely in DPC++ Headers

This one sounds good. 

@kbsmith-intel , @GarveyJoe , @kbobrovs , what do you think?

Author: Documented approach with program-scope variable.

 - detecting if assert failure took place;
 - flushing assert message to `stderr` on host.

When detected, Low-level Runtime reports assert failure to DPCPP Runtime
via events objects. To achieve this, information about assert failure should be
propagated from device-side to SYCL Runtime. This should be performed via calls
to `piEventGetInfo`. This Plugin Interface call "lowers" to `clGetEventInfo` for
OpenCL backend and `zeEventQueryStatus` for Level-Zero backend.

Refer to [OpenCL](extensions/Assert/opencl.md) and [Level-Zero](extensions/Assert/level-zero.md)
extensions.

The following sequence of events describes how user code gets notified:
 - Device side:
   1. Assert fails in device-code in kernel
      // It's not defined if GPU thread stops execution
      // Other GPU threads are left untouched
   2. Specialized version of `__devicelib_assert_fail` is called
   3. Device immediately signals to host (Low-Level Runtime)
 - Host side:
   1. The assert failure gets detected by Low-Level Runtime
   2. Low-Level Runtime sets event status
   3. Upon call to `sycl::queue::wait_and_throw()` or
      `sycl::event::wait_and_throw()` DPCPP Runtime checks event status and

>       throws "assert" exception

Reviewer 2: Thanks.
In the light of recent offline discussion regarding throwing exceptions vs immediate abort - host side should be changed to the following, I believe:
1. ...
2. Low level runtime prints the assert message and calls abort()

+ @GarveyJoe, @kbsmith-intel

Reviewer 4: @kbobrovs  - Yes, I agree.

Author: It was previously stated in the document:
> While throwing an asynchronous exception is quite an extensible way, for the time being DPCPP Runtime merely calls `abort()`.

Doesn't this fit?

Reviewer: That statement makes it sound like the intended interface is that we will throw an asynchronous exception but the current implementation has a bug (i.e. it calls `abort` instead).  If the intention is that the interface will change to call `abort`, we should change the extension specification to say this (and remove all the stuff about throwing an asynchronous exception).

I have no concerns about calling `abort` instead of throwing the exception.  This is more consistent with the host version of `assert`.

Author: Should the events have some erroneous status, then?

Reviewer 2: @s-kanaev, I think the asynchronicity design needs quite a bit of elaboration anyway, and can be done later.  For now let's follow the approach that reviewers recall as the one chosen during the offline discussion - abort() w/o any asynchronous stuff for now. I think this would simplify the process a lot and will allow to add complexity incrementally. This would need to be done then:

 > If the intention is that the interface will change to call abort, we should change the extension specification to say this (and remove all the stuff about throwing an asynchronous exception).

Reviewer 2: And, BTW, thanks for patiently addressing all the comments :)

Author: > This would need to be done then:
>> If the intention is that the interface will change to call abort, we should change the extension specification to say this (and remove all the stuff about throwing an asynchronous exception).

Already done.

Reviewer 8: Given this direction, can we delete the cl_intel_assert_return_code and ze_intel_assert_return_code extensions completely?  They are only needed if we want the SYCL runtime instead of the low level runtime to call abort.

Author: Sounds reasonable.
Removed.

tool with help of building callgraph for each and every kernel in device binary
image.

The added property is used for:
 - deciding if online-linking against fallback devicelib is required;
 - if there's a need to enqueue program scope variable copier kernel and checker
   host-task.

Suppose the following example user code:
```c++
void user_func(int X) {
  assert(X && “X is nil”);
}

int main() {
  queue Q(...);
  Q.submit([&] (handler& CGH) {
    CGH.single_task([=] () {
      do_smth();
      user_func(0);
      do_smth_else();
    });
  });
  ...
}
```

The following LLVM IR pseudo code will be generated after linking against
fallback implementation of devicelib:
```
@AssertHappenedMem = global AssertHappened

/// user's code
void user_func(int X) {
if (!(X && “X is nil")) {
    __assert_fail(...);
  }
}

kernel(...) {
  do_smth()
  user_func(0);
  do_smth_else();
}

/// __assert_fail belongs to Linux version of devicelib
void __assert_fail(...) {
  ...
  __devicelib_assert_fail(...);
}

void __devicelib_assert_fail(Expr, File, Line, GlobalID, LocalID) {
  ...
  volatile int *Ptr = (volatile int *)AssertHappenedMem.Flag;
  int Expected = 0;
  int Desired = 1;

>   if (atomic_CAS(&AssertHappenedMem.Flag, Expected, Desired))

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  if (atomic_CAS(AssertHappenedMem.Flag, Expected, Desired))
```
?

Author: Atomic operation requires referencing the variable, not copying its value.

### Raising assert failure flag and reading it on host

In DPCPP headers one can see if assert is enabled with status of `NDEBUG` macro
with `#ifdef`'s. Though, in order to support for multi translation unit use-case
it's not allowed to rely on definition of `NDEBUG` macro.

*Note: Multi translation unit use-case here is the one with `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
function compiled with assertions enabled and used in a kernel  but the kernel
is compiled with assertions disabled.*

There're two commands used for reading assert failure flag: copy kernel and
checker host task. The copy kernel will copy `AssertHappenedMem` to host and

> host-task will check the `Flag` value and `abort()` as needed. The kernel and
> host task are enqueued when `NDEBUG` macro isn't defined.

Reviewer 2: I think the only decision factor to enqueue or not in the runtime should be presence of the
"uses asserts" property, so:
```suggestion
host-task will check the `Flag` value and `abort()` as needed. The kernel and
host task are enqueued together with a kernel only when the corresponding device
binary image property for this kernel tells that it may use (maybe indirectly) the `assert`
in its code.
```

```c++
#include <assert_happened.hpp> // contains extern decl of AssertHappenedMem

#ifndef NDEBUG
class AssertFlagCopier;
#endif

class queue {
  template <typename T> event submit(T CGF) {
    event Event = submit_impl(CGF);
#ifndef NDEBUG
    std::string KernelName = /* get kernel name from calls to parallel_for, etc. */;
    // assert required
    if (!get_device()->assert_fail_supported() && isAssertUsed(KernelName)) {
      // __devicelib_assert_fail isn't supported by Device-side Runtime
      // Linking against fallback impl of __devicelib_assert_fail is performed
      // by program manager class
      AssertHappened *AH = new AssertHappened;
      buffer<AssertHappened, 1> *Buffer = new buffer<AssertHappened, 1>{1, AH};

      // read flag value
      event CopierEv = submit_impl([&](handler &CGH) {
        CGH.depends_on(Event);

        auto Acc = Buffer->get_access<access::mode::write>(CGH);

        CGH.single_task<AssertFlagCopier>([=] {
          Acc[0].Flag = atomic_load(&AssertHappenedMem.Flag);
        });
      });

      // check flag state
      submit_impl([=](handler &CGH) {
        CGH.depends_on(CopierEv);

        CGH.codeplay_host_task([=] {

>           if (AH->Flag)

Reviewer 9: Should we review code snippets or they just show high level idea?

Author: The code snippets only show general idea

Author: Anyway, I'll fix obvious syntax issues.
